---
layout: post
title: What's the credit score?
author: Wise Expat
image: /images/credit-score.jpg
---

For those who think staying long term in the US you need to know what credit score is and how to keep it healthy. Failing to understand this can have financial and social implications for you. It isn't unheard of people getting reject on background checks when applying to a new job because of the credit score.

Credit score is just a number that was first introduced at the end of the 80's and aims to provide a measure (score) about the creditworthiness of a person. To keep things simple, it tells a potential lender or service provider how risky you are and the likelihood they would get paid.

<!--more-->

There are different types of scores tailored to different applications: mortgages, credit cards and a generic one. The generic score (what most people care) ranges between 300 and 850. Anything about 740 is considered excellent and anything bellow 640 is considered bad.

But wait, why do I care about my score? Well, most lenders would tie the interest rates to your score, the higher your score the lower the interest rate therefore more money in your pocket.

There are three national bureaus (agencies) that collect information about you generated by service providers, credit card companies, banks and other institutions. This is called your credit file, for instance, a credit card company will report to one agency -or most commonly the three agencies- wether you pay your bill on time, how much of your credit card limit is being used and so forth, this information becomes part of your file.

FICO designed a model to generate an score based on the information contained on your credit file. Given the information from all three agencies (Experian, Equifax and TransUnion) might not be exactly the same the score could vary between them. The exact formula used to come up with the credit score number is secret but we know of the following factors:

## Payment History
Wether or not you have missed any payments, suffered any major downturn (bankrupcy, foreclosures, ...). It is one of the most influential component of the credit score and it is believed to account for 35% of it.

**Tip:** Pay always on time and never miss a payment.

## Total Debt
Is the second most important factor accounting for roughly 30% of your score. It's based on all your debt. Not only used credit on your credit card but also other lines of credit like car loan, student loans and so on.

**Tip:** Never use more than 30% of your credit card limit

## Length of your credit History
Although this isn't as important as the other two factors it still has an impact of approximately 15% in the final number. There are two aspects of importance, the average age of the accounts on file and the age of the oldest account. This is a challenge for many expats as we arrive without any prior credit history.

**Tip:** Keep your oldest credit card account open, even if you don't use it.

## Type of credit and Number of accounts
The more different types of credit the more beneficial it will be for your credit score. Credit cards, car loans and mortgages are considered three different types of credit (Revolving, Installment and Mortgage). Also having more accounts in your credit file can boost your number.

**Tip:** Try to apply to at least three credit cards at the beginning, also if you can get a car loan or a lease buying a cheap car. This might not be applicable if you going to live in a city.

## Recent inquiries
Your credit score will be checked (inquired) by companies for instance when contracting a new service, applying for a loan, or even as part of background check on a new job. There are two types of inquires *soft* and *hard*.

On one hand soft inquires do not affect your credit score and they are typically performed during background checks or as part of establishing a new account with a service provider (cell phone companies, utilities, etc.). Your permission is not required to perform them.

On the other hand hard inquires are performed by banks, lenders and credit card companies as part of a lending decision, these affect your credit score (decresing it) and are kept in your file for at least two years. Your consent is required and you can dispute any hard inquiry in your records that you didn't approve.

**Tip:** If you're going to buy a car or a house try to cluster hard inquires within the same month, if you do this your credit score will not be as affected as if you have hard inquires spaced out in time.

# Conclusion
I recommend you build your credit score from day one. I know of one guy that made the mistake of paying everything with cash because he didn't want to owe anything to anybody. He regretted that when he was rejected for a loan to buy a house couple years later because he didn't have enough credit history.

I also didn't apply to multiple credit cards at the beginning and as a result my credit score was lower than 740 and end up with a higher interest rate for my house.

When you first arrive if you apply to several credit cards and get rejected on some of them it doesn't make any difference to you because you don't have any credit history at all. Also many banks have something called secure card which is basically a credit card in which the limit is secured by a deposit you make for the same amount which is then returned to you after a year. The banks issuing these cards report to the credit agencies and allow you to start building your score.

I hope you apply some of the recommendations here as they will save you a lot of time and money.
